Propagating the health of your ECS applications all the way up to Route 53 is crucial for robust failover and overall system reliability. This involves a chain of interconnected health checks, where the health of a lower layer dictates the health of the layer above it.

Here's how to implement this propagation:

1. ECS Tasks (Application Health Check):

Implement a Health Check Endpoint in your ECS Application:

Your application running within the ECS tasks should expose a dedicated HTTP endpoint (e.g., /health or /status).
This endpoint should perform internal checks to verify the application's core functionality, such as:
Database connection status.
Dependent service availability (if applicable).
Internal queue health.
Memory and CPU usage (within reasonable limits).
It should return an HTTP 200 OK status code if healthy, and a 5xx or 4xx (depending on the issue) if unhealthy.
ECS Container Health Checks (Optional but Recommended):

You can define HEALTHCHECK instructions directly in your Dockerfile or in your ECS Task Definition. This helps ECS itself understand the health of individual containers within a task, independent of the ALB.
While ALB health checks are often sufficient for routing, ECS container health checks can help ECS replace unhealthy containers faster, even if the ALB hasn't marked them as unhealthy yet.
Example in Task Definition (JSON):
JSON

"containerDefinitions": [
    {
        "name": "my-app-container",
        // ... other container settings
        "healthCheck": {
            "command": [
                "CMD-SHELL",
                "curl -f http://localhost:8080/health || exit 1"
            ],
            "interval": 30,
            "timeout": 5,
            "retries": 3,
            "startPeriod": 10 // Time to wait after container start before health checks begin
        }
    }
]
2. Internal ALB (Application Load Balancer) Health Checks:

Configure Target Group Health Checks:

Your internal ALB will have a Target Group associated with your ECS service.
Configure the health checks for this target group to point to the health check endpoint exposed by your ECS tasks.
Protocol: HTTP or HTTPS (matching your application's endpoint).
Path: The exact path of your health check endpoint (e.g., /health).
Port: The port your application listens on within the container.
Healthy threshold: The number of consecutive successful health checks required before a target is considered healthy (e.g., 2).
Unhealthy threshold: The number of consecutive failed health checks required before a target is considered unhealthy (e.g., 2).
Interval: How often the ALB checks the health (e.g., 10-30 seconds).
Matcher: 200-299 (or 200 specifically, if that's all you expect).
Propagation: If enough tasks within the target group become unhealthy (as determined by the ALB's health checks), the ALB will consider the entire target group unhealthy. If all target groups for a listener become unhealthy, the ALB itself can be considered unhealthy, though this is usually managed by the upstream NLB.

3. NLB (Network Load Balancer) Health Checks:

Target Group Health Checks:

Your NLB's target group will have the internal ALB as its target.
NLB health checks are typically TCP-based.
Protocol: TCP
Port: The listener port of your internal ALB (e.g., 80 or 443).
Healthy threshold: (e.g., 2)
Unhealthy threshold: (e.g., 2)
Interval: (e.g., 10-30 seconds)
Considerations:

NLB health checks are simpler than ALB health checks; they only check if a TCP connection can be established.
If the internal ALB itself is down, or if it has no healthy targets to route traffic to, the NLB's TCP health checks will fail. This propagates the unhealthiness from the internal ALB up to the NLB.
4. AWS API Gateway (VPC Link Integration Health):

API Gateway doesn't have direct "health checks" in the same way Load Balancers do for their integrations.
Instead, API Gateway's VPC Link integration relies on the health of its target (the NLB).
If the NLB's health checks fail (meaning it can't reach the internal ALB, which can't reach the ECS tasks), then requests from API Gateway to the VPC Link will start to fail with network errors or timeouts.
API Gateway Integration Responses: You should configure your API Gateway integration to return appropriate HTTP status codes (e.g., 504 Gateway Timeout or 500 Internal Server Error) when the backend is unreachable.
5. Public-facing ALB (The First ALB):

This ALB is configured to route to the API Gateway.
If you're using a Custom Domain Name for your API Gateway, the public ALB would typically forward to that custom domain.
Health Check Propagation: The unhealthiness from the API Gateway (due to the underlying NLB/ALB/ECS issues) would manifest as 5xx errors from the API Gateway itself.
No direct health check from this ALB to API Gateway for failover purposes in the same way as an ALB to Target Group. The chain of events (ECS -> Internal ALB -> NLB -> API Gateway VPC Link -> API Gateway response) is what determines the overall health at the API Gateway layer.
6. Route 53 Health Check (The Top-Level Orchestrator):

Create a Route 53 Health Check:

Type: Choose Endpoint health check (HTTP or HTTPS).
Protocol: HTTPS (if your public ALB is using HTTPS).
Endpoint: The custom domain name of your API Gateway (e.g., api.yourdomain.com).
Path: Crucially, define a specific health check path on your API Gateway that's designed to probe the entire backend stack.
Recommendation: Create a simple API Gateway endpoint (e.g., /healthcheck) that integrates with a dedicated lightweight Lambda function or a simple HTTP proxy to your ECS /health endpoint. This Lambda/proxy would perform a quick internal check to ensure the VPC Link, NLB, internal ALB, and at least one ECS task are responsive and functioning. It should return 200 OK if the entire chain is healthy, and a non-200 if not.
Why a dedicated path? You don't want Route 53 hammering your main application endpoints. This dedicated path provides a clear, lightweight signal of overall system health.
Healthy threshold: (e.g., 3 consecutive successes).
Unhealthy threshold: (e.g., 3 consecutive failures).
Interval: (e.g., 10-30 seconds). Lower intervals mean faster detection but more health check traffic.
Associate with Route 53 Records:

Your Primary Route 53 Alias record for api.yourdomain.com will point to the public-facing ALB in your primary region.
Crucially, you'll associate the Route 53 Health Check you just created with this Primary Alias record.
Your Secondary Route 53 Alias record will point to the public-facing ALB in your secondary region, and will be the failover target.
Propagation Logic Flow:

ECS Application: /health endpoint returns 200 OK (healthy) or 5xx (unhealthy).
Internal ALB: Health checks on its target group (ECS tasks) reflect the ECS application's /health status. If enough tasks fail, the target group is marked unhealthy.
NLB: Health checks on its target (Internal ALB) are TCP-based. If the Internal ALB is unhealthy or unreachable, the NLB's target group is marked unhealthy.
API Gateway: When a client (including the Route 53 health checker) hits API Gateway, if the VPC Link's target (NLB) is unhealthy, the API Gateway integration will fail, returning a 5xx response (e.g., 504 timeout or 500).
Route 53 Health Check:
Sends a request to https://api.yourdomain.com/healthcheck.
This request traverses the Public ALB, hits API Gateway, goes through the VPC Link, NLB, Internal ALB, and finally the ECS application's /healthcheck or a dedicated Lambda.
If the ECS app (or any component in the chain) is unhealthy, the final response back to Route 53 will be a non-200.
Upon detecting consecutive non-200 responses, Route 53 marks the primary endpoint as unhealthy and initiates the DNS failover to the secondary region.
This layered approach ensures that a problem at the deepest application level (ECS task) correctly triggers a DNS failover at the highest level (Route 53), redirecting user traffic to your healthy secondary region.
